=head1 NAME

cobbler-register - create a cobbler system record

=head1 SYNOPSIS

cobbler-register [--server=<cobbler.example.org>] --profile=<cobbler-profile-name> [--hostname=<hostname>] 

=head1 DESCRIPTION
 
Running cobbler-register on a system will create a cobbler system record for that system on a remote cobbler server.  No changes will be made on the system itself.

=head1 DETAILS

When installing new machines into a cobbler managed datacenter/lab, it helps to not have to manually enter in the network information for those systems.  Using cobbler register either from a kickstart or a live environment (or even SSH) can help seed the cobbler database.

Network information is discovered automatically for all physical interfaces.  cobbler-register will attempt to discover the hostname, though if 'localhost.localdomain' is found, it will have to use some other data for the cobbler system record.  This is probably not what you want, so specify --hostname in this instance to override that registration value.

For this to work, the "register_new_installs" setting must be enabled on the remote cobbler server. 

When the remote system record is created, for safety reasons, it will be set in Cobbler to be "netboot disabled".  Use "cobbler system edit --name=foo --netboot-enabled=1" to set the machine to reinstall, where "foo" is the name of the new system record.   

=head1 ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

cobbler-register respects the COBBLER_SERVER variable to specify the cobbler server to use.  This is a convenient way to avoid using the --server option.  This variable is set automatically on systems installed via cobbler, assuming standard kickstart templates are used.  If you need to change this on an installed system, edit /etc/profile.d/cobbler.{csh,sh}.

=head1 ADDITIONAL

Reading the cobbler manpage, the koan manpage, and fedorahosted.org/cobbler is highly recommended. 

The mailing list is cobbler@lists.fedorahosted.org.  

Subscribe at https://fedorahosted.org/mailman/listinfo/cobbler

=head1 AUTHOR

Michael DeHaan <michael.dehaan AT gmail>


